Docs: Add Runes complete series (#118)
rsksmart/devportal: docs/04-resources/08-runes/runes-setup.md

---
sidebar_position: 2

> title: Runes Setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Setting up the development environment for Runes
```

> sidebar_label: Runes Setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: Setting up the development environment for Runes
```

Once these prerequisites are in place, you'll be ready to proceed with setting up and using the Runes Mock Bridge effectively.

### **Setting Up the `.env` File for the Runes Mock Bridge**

```
NEXT_PUBLIC_APP_PK='your-private-key'
NEXT_PUBLIC_RPC_URL='your rsk rpc url'
NEXT_PUBLIC_EXPLORER_URL=https://blockstream.info/testnet/tx
NEXT_PUBLIC_RSK_EXPLORER_URL= https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io/tx
NEXT_PUBLIC_CONTRACT_ADDRESS='your erc1155 contract address'
NEXT_PUBLIC_TAPROOT_ADDRESS='your taproot address'
NEXT_PUBLIC_WIF='your wif key'
```

To run the **Runes Mock Bridge** effectively, you'll need to set up the environment variables in a `.env` file. These variables are crucial for connecting your application to the blockchain network, accessing private keys, and managing other sensitive configurations. 

Here's a detailed guide on what each environment variable means, how to get them, and how to set up your `.env` file correctly.

#### **1\. `NEXT_PUBLIC_APP_PK='your-private-key'`**

> This is the private key for your application, which is essential for signing transactions or interacting with the blockchain via the Runes Mock Bridge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the private key for your application, which is essential for signing transactions or interacting with the blockchain via the Runes Mock Bridge.
```

:::info[Info]
 Please avoid using a wallet that contains real funds for these exercises. Using an empty wallet ensures your funds remain secure and reduces the risk of unintentional loss.
:::

* You can obtain your private key from your wallet. Typically, you will export the private key from the wallet software you're using (like MetaMask or any other supported wallet).  
* Follow a detailed tutorial specific to your wallet on how to extract your private key, and then input it here.

#### **2\. `NEXT_PUBLIC_RPC_URL='your RSK RPC URL'`**

The Remote Procedure Call (RPC) URL is how your Runes Mock Bridge interacts with the Rootstock (RSK) blockchain.

> * To get the RSK RPC URL, go to the[RPC API Dashboard](https://dashboard.rpc.rootstock.io/login) and log in. After logging in, you can create an API key that will give you access to the RPC URL.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To get the Rootstock RPC URL, go to the [RPC API Dashboard](https://dashboard.rpc.rootstock.io/login) and log in. After logging in, you can generate an API key and the RPC URL.  
```

* Once the key is generated, you can use it to set up this variable, which allows your bridge to communicate with the blockchain.

#### **3\. `NEXT_PUBLIC_EXPLORER_URL=https://blockstream.info/testnet/tx`**

> This is the URL for the **Bitcoin Testnet Explorer** provided by Blockstream, where you can track Bitcoin testnet transactions.

Reviewer: Link to Blockstream

:::note[Note]
This value remains constant and doesn't need to be changed, as it will always point to the Bitcoin testnet explorer.
:::

> #### **4\. `NEXT_PUBLIC_RSK_EXPLORER_URL=https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io/tx`**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 4. Rootstock Testnet Explorer
```

> This is the URL for the **Rootstock Testnet Explorer**, where you can track transactions related to the Rootstock network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Rootstock Testnet Explorer](https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io/tx) allows for tracking, and verifying transactions on the Rootstock network.
```

> * **Note:** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

:::note[Note]
Like the Blockstream explorer URL, this value is also constant and doesn't need to be changed. It is set to the correct Rootstock testnet explorer.
:::

> #### **5\. `NEXT_PUBLIC_CONTRACT_ADDRESS='your ERC-1155 contract address'`**

Reviewer: Please remove all the headers that look like sentences, just use a text like viewing the public contract address

:::info[Important]
The RuneToken implementation used is not a standard ERC-1155 contract. It includes custom functions to freeze tokens transferred from Rootstock to Bitcoin. To ensure compatibility, please use the same (or an improved) version of the smart contract available in this repository: [RuneToken.sol](https://github.com/rsksmart/rsk-runes/blob/main/contracts/RuneToken.sol) and deploy it.
:::

This variable is used to specify the address of your deployed ERC-1155 contract, which plays a key role in the bridge's functionality.

* You need to deploy your ERC-1155 contract using Remix IDE or a similar tool. Once the deployment is complete, you will get the contract address.  
* Copy the contract address from Remix IDE after deployment and paste it into this variable.

#### **6\. `NEXT_PUBLIC_TAPROOT_ADDRESS='your taproot address'`**

> Taproot addresses are used for Bitcoin transactions with improved privacy and flexibility. The Runes Mock Bridge requires a Taproot address for interacting with Bitcoin's taproot transactions.

Reviewer: Is the mockbridge referenced here the same with the RunesToken.sol url? If not, add a link to the mockbridge

* You can generate a Taproot address using a special package we’ve created. Follow these steps:  

>   1. Clone the repository from [bc-runes-js](https://github.com/IOVgomezdn/bc-runes-js.git).  

Reviewer: We can't use this URL, please ask for the RSKSmart one

Author: I have requested for it.

Author: Done

  2. Run `npm install` to install all the required dependencies.  
  3. Run `npm run generate-address` to generate the Taproot address.  
* Once generated, copy the Taproot address from the output and paste it into this variable.

```
> bc-runes-js@0.3.2 generate-address
> node src/utils/address.js --log=address

No WIF set, generating new random address
{
  taprootAddress: 'tb1pl9lcxu4f373dpzqzvq5amcm8het2chgwc45yhtlxkz5r66dq2zcqhfvrnx',
  WIF: 'cQwnr3fnmrkEPYNpCnsHqn7opcEwfezKbmadBD8b85XozXQCZyzP'
}

```
> you can generate multiple taproot address

#### **7\. `NEXT_PUBLIC_WIF='your WIF key'`**

The Wallet Import Format (WIF) key is the encoded version of your Bitcoin private key, which is necessary for signing Bitcoin transactions on the testnet.

* The same package used to generate the Taproot address will also generate the WIF key.  
  1. After running `npm run generate`, you will get both the Taproot address and the WIF key as part of the output.  
  2. Copy the WIF key and paste it into this variable.

> #### 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

:::

## **Installation Guide**

To clone and run the Runes Mock Bridge project locally, follow these steps:

#### **1\. Clone the Repository:**

```
git clone https://github.com/rsksmart/rsk-runes.git
cd rsk-runes
```

#### **2\. Install Dependencies:**

Use either `yarn` or `npm` to install the necessary dependencies:

```
yarn
or
npm install
```

#### **3\. Access the Application:**

Once the installation is complete, start the development server and access the application in your browser by visiting:

```
http://localhost:3000
```
<img src="/img/resources/runes/runes-ui.png"/>

1. **Click on "Connect Wallet"**:

   * Locate and click the **"Connect Wallet"** button. This is typically found in the top right corner of the platform.

2. **Select MetaMask**:

   * From the list of available wallets, select **MetaMask**.

3. **Follow the On-Screen Instructions**:

   * Once connected, your wallet address will appear on the platform, indicating that your MetaMask wallet is successfully linked.

> ## **Mint Runes on Rootstock**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Mint Runes on Rootstock
```

   * **Example**: Set it to "100" if you want to limit the total rune supply to 100\.  
8. **Receiver**:  
   * **Description**: This will automatically fetch your Rootstock wallet address where the minted runes will be sent.  
9. **Etch Token**:  
   * After filling out all the fields, click the **"Etch Token"** button to start the minting process.  
10. **Wait for Confirmation**:  
    * Once you've clicked **Etch Token**, you will see a screen that informs you that your transaction is being processed.  
    * **Example**: The screen will show that it is waiting for multiple confirmations (e.g., "Waiting for 7 confirmations"). During this time, the network is validating your transaction.  
    * You will need to wait until the required number of confirmations is reached before the rune minting process is complete.  
11. **Runes List**:  
* After the confirmations are completed, your newly minted rune will appear in the **Runes List** at the bottom of the screen, displaying all the runes you've created.
<img src="/img/resources/runes/mint-runes.png"/> 

12. **Log Out**:  
* If you're done, click the **"Logout"** button at the top right of the screen to securely end your session.

> ### **Bridge Your Rune to BTC**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Bridge Runes to BTC
```

Reviewer: We can abstract the minting to Rootstock and BTC as separate guides

Author: Alright, noted
